We saw many uses for se, the sound se.
We have se as a verb, yose from saber, I know, and this se is written with a written accent.
Se or se or we said lo se is very common.
I know it just because se se se is a little short, so you might hear lo se lo se lo se, I know it
And then we have the grammatical se, which we've seen as self, himself, herself, themselves, yourself speaking formally, itself, oneself.
So for example, you can say he stays or he remains himself.
Sequeda.
Good.
So this is the se that we have for him, her, your fumel, it themselves.
And then we also had a se which was when we have two ls together, the first one, the personal one, will turn into pse only because
Spanish doesn't like phonetically the sound of having these two loss together.
So for example, if we had a verb like to prepare, what is to prepare?
Preparar.
And I prepare.
I prepare it.
Lo preparo.
And I prepare them int.
I prepare it for them or I prepare them in
Se lo preparo.
Good.
This less turns into se because we can't have less law.
So we've seen these uses of se so far, the grammatical se for self, and then also this phonetic change.
We have one more useful se to see, one more useful se now when we combine se with me te le nos
We get the meaning of on me in English in the sense of it died on me.
Maybe the computer breaks down and you say it died on me.
So you can say it died on me, it ran out on me
So you have this on me structure in English, which you can use with only some verbs.
Now in Spanish you can do this as well, only it's much more common and you and it's not restricted to just a few verbs
Adding se and then met nos le les.
So for example
The door was La Puerta, La Puerta.
And to close was cerrar, cerrar.
So if you want to say the door closes
You will say the door closes itself.
So let's make that first.
How would you say that?
The door closes itself.
La Puerta Cesier.
Good.
La Puerta Sesierra o Cesar La Puerta.
It's flexible.
Now if you want to say the door closes on me, se me cierra la puerta.
So maybe the door keeps closing by itself and you want to give that on me feeling.
La puerta se me cierra, semesierra la puerta.
Eva Arauque.
To burn in Spanish is quemar.
Q U E M A R Kemar Kemar Kemar So if you want to say the dinner burns, the dinner gets burnt, what was the dinner?
Or to dine?
Senar.
So senar was to have dinner or to dine.
And the dinner, the noun, how was it?
Sena Lasena good.
So it burns itself, the dinner, the dinner gets burnt
La cena sekema.
La cena sequema.
Now if you want to say the dinner burns on me, the dinner's burning on me, how would you make that meaning?
Lacena se me quema.
Lacena semekema.
Semekema la cena.
So you don't have to worry about using this.
structure for now until you're really comfortable with all of these little words like me la san etc all of this but you will hear it
So uh we're looking at this just briefly now so it doesn't cause any confusion when you hear it.
When you have this extra se and you know it's extra because it's coming with me, te, nos
It shouldn't cause any confusion if you hear se me se no se te and then you understand what is happening.
Akabar is to finish or to run out.
Acabar.
Good.
A C A B A R.
Acabar.
How would you say the battery runs out
or the battery runs itself out.
The battery is La Batteria.
La Batteria.
La batteria?
Se acaba.
Good.
La batteria se acaba.
If you want to say, oh my battery always runs out, you're talking about your phone and your battery is always running out, you can say
My battery the battery like we said we don't use my as much in Spanish as we do in English The battery always runs out on me the battery always runs out on me what was the word for always
Siempre.
Good, so let's try this sentence.
The battery always runs out on me.
La batteria, siempre
Very good.
La batteria siempre se me acaba.
How would you ask?
Does the battery run out on you?
Speaking informally.
La bateria se te acaba?
Good.
La batteria se te acaba?
And what if you were speaking formally?
La batteria se le acaba.
Good.
We use le because it's on you.
The battery runs out on you.
So not using LO, using le to you, on you, from you, for you.
All included there in le and if you are speaking to more than one person.
La bateria se les accapa.
Oh no, se les acapa.
Good, very good.
La batería se les acaba.
Good.
So if you hear this extra set around, you know what it's doing.
Kemar was to burn.
How would you say it burnt?
It burnt
Now what if you wanted to say the dinner got burnt?
La Senna
Se kemo.
Good.
La cena sekemo.
Sekemo lasena.
The dinner got burnt.
Now how would you say the dinner burnt on me?
The dinner got burnt on me.
La Cena Semekemo.
Good.
La cena semekemo.
Semekemo la cena.
The dinner burnt on us.
Placena se nos quemo.
Good.
Lacena se nos quemo.
Very good.